Add post Gating Image Promotion on GitLab (#283)
conforma/conforma.github.io: website/content/posts/gating-image-promotion-on-gitlab.md

---
title: "Gating Image Promotion on GitLab"
date: 2024-06-12T18:64:00-00:00
author: "Luiz Carvalho"
---

Once you have a container image ready for promotion, it is important to first verify the image meets

> a certain criteria before it is made available to consumers. In this blog post, we look at how to

Reviewer: "a certain criteria" sounds a little stiff to me, perhaps something like this:

```suggestion
the standards you've decided to enforce for all promoted images, before it is made available to consumers. In this blog post, we look at how to
```
or

```suggestion
the build, quality, and security policies you've decided to enforce for all promoted images, before it is made available to consumers. In this blog post, we look at how to
```

Author: Thanks, but I think I like it as is better. Let me know if you strongly otherwise.

achieve this in a [GitLab] pipeline.

<!--more-->

> See the [appendix](#appendix) section for the full example.

Consider a simple [.gitlab-ci.yaml] file:

```yaml
---
stages:
  - build
  - promote

docker-build:
  stage: build
  image: docker:cli
  services:
    - docker:dind
  variables:
    DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME: $CI_REGISTRY_IMAGE:$CI_COMMIT_SHORT_SHA
  before_script:
    - docker login -u "$CI_REGISTRY_USER" -p "$CI_REGISTRY_PASSWORD" $CI_REGISTRY
  script:
    - docker build --pull -t "$DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME" .
    - docker push "$DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME"

tag-latest:
  stage: promote
  image:
    name: ghcr.io/sigstore/cosign/cosign:v2.2.3-dev@sha256:0d795fa145b03026b7bc2a35e33068cdb75e1c1f974e604c17408bf7bd174967
    entrypoint: ["/busybox/sh", "-c"]
  variables:
    DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME: $CI_REGISTRY_IMAGE:$CI_COMMIT_SHORT_SHA
  before_script:
    - cosign login "$CI_REGISTRY" -u "$CI_REGISTRY_USER" -p "$CI_REGISTRY_PASSWORD"
  script:
    - cosign copy -f "${DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME}" "$CI_REGISTRY_IMAGE:latest"
```

> Above is a pipeline with two jobs. The first, `docker-build`, will build a container image and push

Reviewer 2: Consider:

The example above shows a pipeline with two jobs.

    "finishedOn": "${CI_PIPELINE_CREATED_AT}"
   }
  }
}
EOF
```

Next, we use this script to generate the SLSA Provenance predicate, and change the previously added
`secure` job to associate this information with our image.

```yaml
# [...]

generate-provenance:
  needs: [docker-build]
  stage: process
  image: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi9:latest
  script:
    - ./scripts/generate.sh > predicate.json
  artifacts:
    paths:
      - predicate.json

secure:
  needs:  # <- added
    - job: generate-provenance
      artifacts: true
  stage: process
  # [...]
  script:
    - cosign sign ${DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME}
    # added line below
    - cosign attest --predicate predicate.json --type https://slsa.dev/provenance/v1 ${DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME}

# [...]
```

Now our image is signed and attested! The consumers of this image are ecstatic.

## Gate Promotion

There is a gotcha in our pipeline! What if there is a bug in our `generate.sh` script? What if the
signature, for whatever reason, is not created as expected? Any consumer of our image that practices
supply chain security best practices will be prevented from consuming the image. Those poor users...

> 

Reviewer 2: Style suggestion: Move "those poor users" to a freestanding line for impact.

> To mitigate these issues, we introduce a gating step that validates the image, like consumers would,

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:

"... these issues, we _can_ introduce..."

*before* promoting the image. As part of this validation, let's define a minimal Enterprise Contract

> policy configuration file, called `policy.yaml`, that captures the validity requirements:

Reviewer 2: should this be _validation_ requirements?

Author: It does sound a bit odd.. I reworked the sentence like this:

> Let's define a minimal Enterprise Contract policy configuration
file, called `policy.yaml`, that captures the validation requirements

  script:
    - ec validate image --image "${DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME}" --policy policy.yaml --output yaml --show-successes

tag-latest:
  needs: [validate]  # <- added
  stage: promote
  # [...]
```

Now we have the guarantee that when the image is promoted, it already has the expected signature and
SLSA Provenance attestation. Cool!

## Advanced Validation

Our `policy.yaml` is very minimal. The Enterprise Contract validation is ensuring the image is
signed with the expected identity, and that it also contains a SLSA Provenance also signed with the
same identity. This is great, but we can, and will, take it further!

Let's use one of the community policy rules to ensure the SLSA Provenance correctly captures the git
information. The [slsa_source_correlated] policy package is meant for exactly this use case.

To use it, let's update our `policy.yaml`:

```yaml
---
identity:
  subject: https://gitlab.com/lucarval/sign-attest-poc//.gitlab-ci.yml@refs/heads/main
  issuer: https://gitlab.com
sources:
  - policy:
      - github.com/enterprise-contract/ec-policies//policy/lib
      - github.com/enterprise-contract/ec-policies//policy/release
    config:
      include:

>         - slsa_source_correlated

Reviewer: I think there's a missing sentence or two to explain the updates to the policy.yaml and what they're for. Maybe also a link to the slsa_source_correlated docs?

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Ack. It's linked to the docs on the paragraph above that explains why we're making the change. I rephrased the last sentence to highlight that we are adding the `sources` section, and added a little comment on the yaml to make it obvious (like in the other examples)

```

We also need to tweak the parameters to the `ec` CLI. Let's use the `--images` parameter instead of
the `--image` parameter so we can provide more information about the image we are verifying. The
`--images` parameter requires more than just an image reference. We create a file, called
`images.yaml`, on the fly which includes the expected git repository and commit for the image.

```yaml
# [...]

validate:
  # [...]
  script:  # <- replaced script block
    - |
      cat <<EOF | tee images.yaml
      ---
      components:
        - containerImage: "${DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME}"
          source:
            git:
              url: "${CI_PROJECT_URL}"
              revision: "${GIT_REVISION}"
      EOF
    - ec validate image --images images.yaml --policy policy.yaml --output yaml --show-successes

> 

Reviewer: Another sentence here too maybe:

Now, when ec validate runs it will pull in the rego checks from the `slsa_source_correlated` rego package defined in the ec-policies git repo and verify that it is passing for your branch new container image.

Author: Not sure If I want to mention rego here. As a user, that's an implementation detail that is not important to me.

I do agree that having a sentence here would be useful. Added:

> When the `validate` job runs next, in addition to the previous checks, it will also verify the SLSA
Provenance contains the expected git source information.

---
title: "Gating Image Promotion on GitLab"
date: 2024-06-12T18:64:00-00:00
author: "Luiz Carvalho"
---

Once you have a container image ready for promotion, it is important to first verify the image meets
a certain criteria before it is made available to consumers. In this blog post, we look at how to
achieve this in a [GitLab] pipeline.

<!--more-->

> See the [appendix](#appendix) section for the full example.

Consider a simple [.gitlab-ci.yaml] file:

```yaml
---
stages:
  - build
  - promote

docker-build:
  stage: build
  image: docker:cli
  services:
    - docker:dind
  variables:
    DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME: $CI_REGISTRY_IMAGE:$CI_COMMIT_SHORT_SHA
  before_script:
    - docker login -u "$CI_REGISTRY_USER" -p "$CI_REGISTRY_PASSWORD" $CI_REGISTRY
  script:
    - docker build --pull -t "$DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME" .
    - docker push "$DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME"

tag-latest:
  stage: promote
  image:

>     # TODO: Use a newer image?

Reviewer 3: Remove?

Author: Done. Thank you!
